This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format
and has been generated with option --help-pod .
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt


=head1 OVERVIEW

BrailleToBitmap.pl version 1.00

This script converts Braille text to a bitmap.

I had to write this script because I had some simple code which misuses Braille to draw pictures,
and ImageMagick can write Braille but not read it.

You need a Perl interpreter installed on your system to run this script.

=head1 USAGE

 perl BrailleToBitmap.pl [options] [--] <braille-input.txt> <bitmap-output.ppm>

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item *

B<-h, --help>

Print this help text.

=item *

B<--help-pod>

Preprocess and print the POD section. Useful to generate the README.pod file.

=item *

B<--version>

Print this tool's name and version number (1.00).

=item *

B<--license>

Print the license.

=item *

B<< --verbose >>

Show progress information.

=item *

B<-->

Terminate options processing. Useful to avoid confusion between options and filenames
that begin with a hyphen ('-'). Recommended when calling this script from another script,
where the filename comes from a variable or from user input.

=back

=head1 BRAILLE TEXT INPUT FILE FORMAT

The input file format consists of text lines with Unicode 8-dot Braille characters in the range U+2800..U+28FF.

An example file I<< x-in-a-rectangle-box-as-braille.txt >> is distributed with this script.

A future version of this script may support other Braille characters, like the 6-dot variant.

No extraneous characters are tolerated.

The file encoding must be UTF-8, with or without the UTF-8 BOM.

The end-of-line marker can be either Unix (LF) or Windows (CR, LF).

A text line is not allowed to be empty.

Normally, the Braille "picture" is a rectangle, but the text lines do not have to be of the same length. The resulting bitmap rows are padded as needed.

This file format is similar to ImageMagick's UBRL format, but beware that ImageMagick
prepends a header with resolution information, and that header is not supported by this script,
so you would have to manually remove it.

This is how to convert a PNG to UBRL with ImageMagick for test purposes:

 convert -negate monochrome-picture.png UBRL:picture-as-ubrl.txt

Option I<< -negate >> inverts the black/white colours to match what this script generates.

After manually removing the header at the beginning of the file, you can then feed it to this tool.

=head1 BITMAP OUTPUT FILE FORMAT

The output bitmap file is generated in Portable Pixmap format (PPM), in text format (the type is then P3).
This format can be read by GIMP, ImageMagick and other programs.

The background is black, and a Braille dot translates to a white pixel.

The following ImageMagick command converts such a PPM file into a PNG:

 convert bitmap-output.ppm converted.png

You may need to specify option I<< -negate >> in order to invert the black/white colours.

=head1 EXIT CODE

An exit code of 0 means success, any other value signals an error.

=head1 FEEDBACK

Please send feedback to rdiez-tools at rd10.de

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2026 R. Diez

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3 as published by
the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License version 3 for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3
along with this program.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
