
This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

The following is just a copy of the POD documentation inside the script source code.

=head1 OVERVIEW

AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl version 1.04

This tool prints a text line for each byte read, with timestamp, time delta,
byte value and ASCII character name. In order to improve readability,
the time delta is only printed if it has changed with respect
to the previous byte.

The output looks like this:

  2018-09-06 17:12:56     0,000  +  0,000   97  0x61  a
  2018-09-06 17:12:56     0,000         -   98  0x62  b
  2018-09-06 17:12:56     0,092  +  0,092   99  0x63  c
  2018-09-06 17:12:56     0,092         -  100  0x64  d
  2018-09-06 17:12:57     0,295  +  0,203  101  0x65  e
  2018-09-06 17:12:56     0,295         -  102  0x66  f

The data log above means that a first data packet was received with 2 bytes (ASCII codes 'a' and 'b').
The second colum shows the number of seconds elapsed since the arrival of the first packet.
A second data packet arrived 92 ms later with 2 more bytes ('c' and 'd').
Finally, a third data packed arrived 203 ms later with 2 more bytes ('e' and 'f').

I wrote this tool mainly to help troubleshoot data timing issues
over serial ports. But this script can read from stdin or from any file,
so you can use it for example with FIFOs.

=head1 USAGE

S<perl AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl [options] [--] E<lt>filenameE<gt>>

If the filename is a single hyphen ('-'), then data is read from stdin. This is useful when piping between processes.

If you always want the English thousands separator (',') and decimal separator ('.')
in the date stamp and time delta values, no matter what the current locale is,
set environment variable LANG=C before running this script. The easiest way is like this:

  env LANG=C  perl AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl ...

When piping stdout from other processes to this script, stdout buffering may cause
the data stream to 'stutter'. See tools I<< unbuffer >> and I<< S<< stdbuf -o0 >> >> for more information.

Example for a serial port under Linux:

  stty  -F "/dev/serial/by-id/my_serial_port"  cs8  -parenb  -cstopb  -clocal  -echo  raw  speed 9600
  perl AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl "/dev/serial/by-id/my_serial_port"

Example for a serial port under Windows:

  mode COM1 BAUD=9600 PARITY=n DATA=8 STOP=1
  perl AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl COM1

Here is a one-shot TCP server that redirects all received data to this script:

  socat -u TCP4-LISTEN:1234,bind=localhost STDOUT | perl AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl -

And this command connects to the TCP server above and sends some data:

  printf "Test data" | socat -u STDIN TCP4:localhost:1234

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item *

B<--no-hints>

Do not print any hints, just the annotated data.

=item *

B<--show-microseconds>

Display timing information down to microseconds.

If you need this level of accuracy, make sure that your system can actually deliver it.
Start by finding out the timing resolution:

  perl -MTime::HiRes -e 'print Time::HiRes::clock_getres( CLOCK_REALTIME ) . "\n"'

And then see further below on how to benchmark this script.

=item *

B<-h, --help>

Print this help text.

=item *

B<--version>

Print the name and version number.

=item *

B<--license>

Print the license.

=item *

B<-->

Terminate options processing. Useful to avoid confusion between options and filenames
that begin with a hyphen ('-'). Recommended when calling this script from another script,
where the filename comes from a variable or from user input.

=back

=head1 EXIT CODE

Exit code: 0 on success, some other value on error.

=head1 SIGNALS

SIGINT (Ctrl+C) causes this script to print a message about having received this signal
(assuming that hints have not been disabled) and terminate with an exit code of 0.

=head1 CAVEATS

=over

=item * There are performance limitations.

The Perl interpreter is not very fast, so do not expect a high timing accuracy.

There is a considerable start-up delay due to Perl interpreter initialisation.
If you are starting the script and immediately feeding it with data,
the timing for the first data packets will probably be inaccurate due
to this delay.

This script will probably only keep up with moderate data rates.
See the section below about testing for benchmark information.

=item *

This script is sensitive to changes to the clock.

If the local time changes, the timing reflected in the data log will not be accurate.

An improvement would be to provide a command-line argument to use
the CLOCK_MONOTONIC POSIX high resolution timer, if available on the system,
instead of the realtime clock. The data log would then show relative time offsets,
which are insensitive to clock changes, in place of the time of the day.

However, having the local time in the data log is often very convenient for
cross-reference purposes, so I fear that such an option would hardly be used in practice.

=item * A Perl interpreter with 64-bit integer support is required.

That should actually be the case for all modern Perl distributions, even on 32-bit operating systems.
This script does check, but you can also manually find out like this:

  perl -V | grep USE_64_BIT_INT

Otherwise, you would quickly encounter integer overflows. Using multiprecision arithmetic would be too slow.

=back

=head1 TESTING THIS SCRIPT

=over

=item *

Test with simulated data pauses:

  ./GenerateTestDatagrams.sh | ./AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl -

=item *

Test with a FIFO:

  ./GenerateTestBytes-0-to-255.sh testFifo & ./AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl testFifo && wait

=item *

Benchmark the raw CPU performance generating the data log:

  dd bs=$(( 1024 * 1024 )) count=1 if=/dev/urandom | ./AnnotateWithTimestamps.pl - >/dev/null

Example values:

  Intel Core i3-6100 CPU @ 3.70 GHz
  Perl v5.26.2
  Windows 10, 64-bit Cygwin
  Speed: 800 kB/s

  Intel Core 2 Duo T8100 @ 2.10 GHz
  Perl v5.22.1
  Ubuntu 16.04.5 LTS, x86_64
  Speed: 402 kB/s

  Intel Atom CPU N450 @ 1.66 GHz
  Perl v5.26.1
  Ubuntu 18.04.1 LTS, x86_64
  Speed: 86 kB/s

=back

=head1 ALTERNATIVES

There are many tools to annotate and timestamp data streams. You can achieve a similar data log with I<< hexdump >> and I<< ts >> as follows:

  ./GenerateTestDatagrams.sh | stdbuf -o0 hexdump -v  -e '/1  "% 6_ad# "'  -e '/1 " %3u  "'  -e '/1  "0x%02X  "'  -e '/1 "%_u\n"' | ts '%F %H:%M:%.S'

In Ubuntu/Debian, package I<< moreutils >> provides tool I<< ts >>. The trouble is, I<< ts >> is a shell script and runs very slowly.
Furthermore, the command line above does not print relative times, which makes it harder to see where the data transmission pauses occur.

=head1 FEEDBACK

Please send feedback to rdiezmail-tools at yahoo.de

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2018 R. Diez

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3 as published by
the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License version 3 for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3
along with this program.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
