
This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

The following is just a copy of the POD documentation inside the script source code.

=head1 OVERVIEW

decode-jtag-idcode.pl version 1.02

This command-line tool breaks a JTAG IDCODE up into fields as specified in IEEE standard 1149.1.

=head1 USAGE

S<perl decode-jtag-idcode.pl [options] E<lt>0xIDCODE<gt>>

Example:

  perl decode-jtag-idcode.pl 0x4ba00477

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item *

B<-h, --help>

Print this help text.

=item *

B<--version>

Prints the name and version number.

=item *

B<--license>

Print the license.

=back

=head1 EXIT CODE

Exit code: 0 on success, some other value on error.

=head1 FEEDBACK

Please send feedback to rdiezmail-tools at yahoo.de

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2013 R. Diez

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3 as published by
the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License version 3 for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3
along with this program.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
