
This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

=head1 Disk Images with Progress

Say you want to make an image file from of a disk or partition, and then restore it later.
You can achieve it easily with I<< dd >>:

  sudo dd if=/dev/sdxx                      of=$HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage
  sudo dd if=$HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage  of=/dev/sdxx

Let's add a few features:

=over

=item * Display a visual notification at the end.

Copying a disk may take a long time. We will use my I<< background.sh >> tool,
which displays a desktop notification at the end. This tool also lowers the disk priority,
in order to reduce the performance impact on your desktop environment.

If you do not want to use I<< background.sh >>, leave it out from the examples below.

=item * Display a progress bar.

We could use dd's option I<< status=progress >>, which prints something like this:

  77594624 bytes (78 MB, 74 MiB) copied, 13 s, 5,9 MB/s

However, the progress message does not provide an estimation of the time left
even if the total size of the data is known, at least with GNU dd version 8.28.

Therefore, we will use I<< pv >> instead. There are ways to make it display a dialog with a graphical progress bar,
but we will just display a text progress bar in the current console. This is what it looks like:

  49MiB 0:00:44 [6,07MiB/s] [===>                              ] 13% ETA 0:04:53

I<< pv >>'s option "-f" ("--force") is necessary if you use I<< background.sh >>. Otherwise,
pv will think it is not outputting to a terminal (but to a I<< tee >> pipe) and will
not generate the progress bar.

The combined command-line option I<< -ftpreb >> means:

 f: --force
 t: --timer
 p: --progress
 r: --rate
 e: --eta
 b: --bytes

=item * Sync the disk cache at the end.

This way, when I<< dd >> has finished, we know that the all the data has been physically written to disk.
Otherwise the data will land in the write-back cache first, and we must not
forget to run I<< sync >> before removing the physical media.

I<< dd >>'s option "oflag=sync" syncs after each output block, and "conv=fsync" does one sync at the end.

=item * Avoid quickly overloading the system's file cache.

Linux' I<< page cache >> is braindead and will agressively write-cache huge amounts of data at once,
eventually dropping all other cached data. Your desktop environment may be rendered unresponsive
afterwards, and you will have to wait a long time for the write cache to flush after the progress indication
has reached 100%. This effect is especially noticable on slow USB 2.0 disks.

We will be limitting I<< dd >>'s block size with "bs=128M". Beware that this makes I<< dd >>
consume 128 MiB of RAM during the whole operation.

I<< dd >>'s "oflag=sync" option will make it sync to disk from time to time. This will will not eliminate
the performance degradation, but will smooth it out over time. The final write-back flush time will
also be reduced considerably, as write operations will be evenly spread during the whole operation.

Alternatively, I<< dd >>'s option "oflag=direct" bypasses the write caching and should avoid this issue completely.

=item * Prevent the "partial read" warning.

If you do not use option I<< iflag=fullblock >>, you risk reading less data than specified, and you get
a warning like this:

  dd: warning: partial read (131072 bytes); suggest iflag=fullblock 0% ETA 4:59:16

=item * Reliably report errors with a non-zero exit code.

By default, the shell ignores some of the error indications from pipe constructs.
Therefore, we will be using command "set -o pipefail". This is especially important when using I<< background.sh >>,
as the final "success" or "error" indication depends on the exit code.

=item * Compress the image file.

We will be using I<< gzip >> to (hopefully) reduce the image file size. It is probably best to favour speed
over compression level, so we will be using option "--fast". Otherwise, you will probably want to use
I<< bzip >> or I<< xz >> instead.

=back

If you want to store your disk image file on a FAT32 partition, you will easily hit the 4 GiB size limit.
We could also use I<< split >> to overcome this limitation.

The souped-up versions look as follows. You will always have to modify the parts in bold.

=head2 Make a Disk Image (Disk to File)

C<< background.sh bash -c "set -o pipefail && sudo pv -ftpreb B<< /dev/sdxx >> | gzip --fast >\"B<< $HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage.gz >>\"" >>

Make a CD-ROM ISO image:

C<< background.sh bash -c "sudo pv -ftpreb B<< /dev/cdrom >> >cdimage.iso" >>

=head2 Restore a Disk Image (File to Disk)

C<< background.sh bash -c "set -o pipefail && pv -ftpreb \"B<< $HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage.gz >>\" | gunzip --to-stdout | sudo dd bs=128M  iflag=fullblock  oflag=direct  conv=fsync  B<< of=/dev/sdxx >>" >>

Note that the progress bar will not be very accurate, as I<< pv >> will be measuring the amount of data read from the compressed file.
If the disk image has large empty areas (filled with zeros), the time estimates will be off by a large margin.
For example, if the last disk sectors are empty, then the progress indicator will remain at 100% for a long time at the end.
The trouble is, the disk may be bigger than the image, and finding out the size of the uncompressed data is not trivial.

For .xz files, use "xz --decompress --to-stdout" instead of the I< gunzip > command.

If the source is a .zip file, you cannot pipe it to "unzip -p", because I<< unzip >> cannot read .zip archives from I<< stdin >>.
I heard that I<< zcat >> (the GNU version, equivalent to I<< gunzip --to-stdout >>, not the BSD version of I<< gunzip >>)
can read from I<< stdin >> and will then decompress only the first file inside the .zip archive,
issuing a warning if there is more than one compressed file in the archive, but I haven't tested it yet.
So, either decompress the .zip archive first, or use this alternative, which will not show an estimated time left:

C<< background.sh bash -c "set -o pipefail && unzip -p \"B<< $HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage.zip >>\" | pv -ftpreb | sudo dd bs=128M  iflag=fullblock  oflag=direct  conv=fsync  B<< of=/dev/sdxx >>" >>

=head2 Verify That a Disk Image Was Written Correctly to a Disk

First of all, you should probably unmount and remount the disk,
or the system's file cache may falsify the data verification results.

Note that, if you remove and reattach the disk, the automounter will probably mount any partitions with read/write access,
and the disk will be immediately written to, probably to update the "last access timestamp" on the root directory.
So the data verification will always fail.

The easiest way to verify whether a disk image was written correctly is to read the data back from the disk and compare it
with the image file. For example:

C<< background.sh bash -c "set -o pipefail && pv -ftpreb \"B<< $HOME/some/dir/test.diskimage.gz >>\" | gunzip --to-stdout | sudo cmp -- - B<< /dev/sdxx >>" >>

In the I<< cmp >> command above, '-' means I<< stdin >>,
and I<< sudo >> is needed because I<< cmp >> will be reading from a block device,
instead of from a regular file.

The verification will probaby fail, because the disk is usually bigger than the image which was written to it.
But as long as the error message looks like this, then it is fine:

 cmp: EOF on - after byte 10989076480, in line 89840717

Error message "EOF on '-'" just means that the image file was shorter than the disk, which was expected.

If you are going to verify the image often, it would be faster to calculate a checksum,
so that you do not have to read the disk image every time.

=head2 Wipe a Disk Out

C<< BLOCK_DEVICE=B<< /dev/sdxx >> background.sh bash -c "set -o pipefail && BLOCK_DEVICE_SIZE=\"\$(sudo blockdev --getsize64 \"\$BLOCK_DEVICE\")\" && dd  bs=128M  count=\$BLOCK_DEVICE_SIZE  iflag=fullblock,count_bytes  if=/dev/zero | pv -ftpreb --size \$BLOCK_DEVICE_SIZE | sudo  dd  bs=128M  iflag=fullblock  oflag=direct  conv=fsync  of=\"\$BLOCK_DEVICE\"" >>

This one-liner just writes zeros to the whole disk or partition. In order to display an accurate progress bar,
we have to find out beforehand (with I<< blockdev >>) how big the disk is. We need to read with I<< dd >> because
there is no way to tell I<< pv >> to stop reading after the given number of bytes.
