
This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

The following is just a copy of the POD documentation inside the script source code.

=head1 OVERVIEW

GenerateRangeMappingTable version 1.00

This tool generates a mapping table (a look-up table) between an integer range
and another numeric range (integer or floating point).
The mapping can be linear or exponential.

This script takes no command-line arguments, so you will have to modify the
range parameters in the source code. This is probably worth improving in the future.

There are several options to control the table format, and an option to plot the values with gnuplot.
Other plotting options would be a nice addition, like a plain-text plotting.

=head1 EXIT CODE

Exit code: 0 on success, some other value on error.

=head1 FEEDBACK

Please send feedback to rdiezmail-tools at yahoo.de

=head1 LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2017 R. Diez

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3 as published by
the Free Software Foundation.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU Affero General Public License version 3 for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License version 3
along with this program.  If not, see L<http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

=cut
