
This is the source file from which the README file is generated.

This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to text or to HTML
for easy reading:

  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

  # pod2html seems buggy, at least in perl v5.10.1, therefore
  # I'm using this long one-liner instead (with bash):
  perl -MPod::Simple::HTML  -e "\$p = Pod::Simple::HTML->new; \$p->index( 1 ); \$p->output_fh( *STDOUT{IO} ); \$p->force_title('mlocate Conflicting Package'); \$p->parse_file('README.pod');"  >README.html

This file is best edited with emacs module pod-mode, available in CPAN.
However, the POD syntax is quite simple and can be edited with a standard text editor.

=pod

=head1 I<< mlocate >> Conflicting Package

If you do not use the I<< mlocate >> database, then you probably don't want to pay the associated performance price,
especially on systems with little memory, where updating the database can render the computer unresponsive for a long time.

Install this package to prevent debian package I<< mlocate >> from ever being installed again.

This package is not actually a hard, unsurmountable ban, but you should get a conflict warning from your favourite
package manager if something wants to install I<< mlocate >> again.

If you just remove package I<< mlocate >>, then tool I<< updatedb >> ends up referencing I<< /usr/bin/updatedb.findutils >> instead of I<< /usr/bin/updatedb.mlocate >>,
so you need to remove package I<< locate >> too.

=cut
