
This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to HTML or to plain text for easy reading:

  pod2html README.pod >README.html
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

=pod

=head1 I<< mlocate >> Conflicting Package

Later note: On Ubuntu 22.04, I<< plocate >> is now the default I<< locate >> implementation, replacing I<< mlocate >>.
So this I<< conflicting package >> may no longer work, more research is necessary.

If you do not use the I<< mlocate >> database, then you probably don't want to pay the associated performance price,
especially on systems with little memory, where updating the database can render the computer unresponsive for a long time.

For more information about the kind of performance problems that the I<< mlocate >> background indexer can cause, take a look at this Ubuntu bug report:

=over

updatedb.mlocate uses 100% of the hdd IO. The OS is completely unusable

L<< https://bugs.launchpad.net/ubuntu/+source/mlocate/+bug/1190696 >>

=back

The bug is from june 2013, and 4 years later, Ubuntu has not even attempted to mitigate the problem by simply lowering the background indexer's disk priority.

On Debian/Ubuntu systems, remove packages I<< locate >> and I<< mlocate >>, and then install this 'conflicting' package to prevent
them from ever being installed again, as some packages mention I<< mlocate >> as a suggested or recommended dependency. This is one way to do it:

  sudo dpkg --remove locate
  sudo dpkg --remove mlocate
  sudo dpkg --install mlocate-conflicting-package_1.002_all.deb

This 'conflicting' package is not actually a hard, unsurmountable ban, but you should get a conflict warning from your favourite
package manager if something wants to install I<< locate >> or I<< mlocate >> again.

Note that, if you just remove package I<< mlocate >>, then package I<< locate >> will provide an I<< updatedb >> tool that ends up referencing I<< /usr/bin/updatedb.findutils >> instead
of I<< /usr/bin/updatedb.mlocate >>, so you need to remove package I<< locate >> too.

=cut
